---
title: "Adding Persistent Storage to RKE2 with Longhorn"
date: 2022-12-27
excerpt: "Configure Longhorn to provide persistent storage to RKE2 clusters using Flux CD"
tags: [rke2, longhorn, devops, cluster, storage, persistence]
header:
  overlay_image: /images/longhorn.png
  overlay_filter: 0.5 # same as adding an opacity of 0.5 to a black background
---

# Adding Persistent Storage to RKE2 with Longhorn

```yaml
Title: Adding Persistent Storage to RKE2 with Longhorn
Author: Mitch Murphy
Date: 2023-12-27
```

---

- [Adding Persistent Storage to RKE2 with Longhorn](#adding-persistent-storage-to-rke2-with-longhorn)
- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Install Longhorn](#install-longhorn)
- [Configure Longhorn](#configure-longhorn)


# Introduction

What is Longhorn? Longhorn refers to a project that provides persistent storage for Kubernetes. Longhorn aims to simplify and enhance the management of persistent storage in Kubernetes clusters. It is an open-source distributed block storage system that can be deployed as a containerized application.

Some key features of Longhorn include:

1. **Distributed Storage**: Longhorn distributes block storage across multiple nodes in a Kubernetes cluster, providing redundancy and fault tolerance.
2. **Snapshot and Backup**: It supports snapshots, allowing you to capture the state of your persistent volumes at a specific point in time. Additionally, Longhorn includes features for backup and restore operations.
3. **Replication and Synchronization**: Longhorn replicates data across nodes to ensure data integrity and provides mechanisms for data synchronization.
4. **User Interface**: Longhorn includes a user-friendly web-based UI that allows users to manage and monitor their storage resources easily.
5. **Kubernetes Native**: Longhorn is designed to work seamlessly with Kubernetes, integrating into the Kubernetes control plane and leveraging custom resources to define and manage persistent volumes.

It's worth noting that the landscape of Kubernetes storage solutions may evolve, and new developments may have occurred since my last update. Therefore, I recommend checking the official Longhorn project documentation or other reliable sources for the latest information on Longhorn and its features.

# Prerequisites

Before you begin this guide, you'll need the following:

1. A Kubernetes cluster running RKE2
2. Flux CD installed on your cluster
3. A GitHub repository to store your cluster configuration
4. Storage provisioned, mounted and formatted on each node in your cluster
   - For this guide, I will be attaching a `Virutal Hard Disk` to each node/virtual machine in Hyper-V, mounted at `/mnt/storage`
   - After attaching the VHD to each node, you will need to format the disk with a filesystem. For this guide, I will be using `ext4`
   - Stay tuned as I will be writing a guide on how to automate this process using Ansible

# Install Longhorn

We will be using Flux CD to install Longhorn on our cluster. If you haven't already, you will need to install Flux CD on your cluster. You can find a guide on how to do this [here](https://mitchmurphy.dev/posts/fluxcd/). Once you have Flux CD installed, you will need to create a `HelmRepository` resource to point to the Longhorn Helm chart as well as a `HelmRelease` resource to install Longhorn on your cluster. Please see the structure in this [repo](https://mitchmurphy.io/longhorn/)

# Configure Longhorn

As we will be mounting our storage to `/mnt/storage` you must set the `defaultSettings.defaultDataPath` to `/mnt/storage` in the `HelmRelease` resource. This will ensure that Longhorn will use the storage we have provisioned on each node in our cluster.

_Note_: that this will create a default `StorageClass` on our Kubernetes cluster. This means that you do not need to specify the `StorageClass` when you create `PersistentVolumeClaims`, as the default `StorageClass` will be used to provision the `PersistentVolume`.
